{
  "comments": [
    {
      "key": {
        "uuid": "7ac7a964_8f92b855",
        "filename": "nsdb/src/main/proto/topology.proto",
        "patchSetId": 1
      },
      "lineNbr": 271,
      "author": {
        "id": 1002751
      },
      "writtenOn": "2015-11-19T21:49:04Z",
      "side": 0,
      "message": "Can we do this for a minor version release? Wouldn\u0027t it break compatibility with existing deployments?",
      "range": {
        "startLine": 271,
        "startChar": 4,
        "endLine": 271,
        "endChar": 63
      },
      "revId": "7ebe23af24927ce99ead8f3436ad2ca716f7152b",
      "serverId": "d5d70762-12d0-45a1-890d-524b12d3f735",
      "unresolved": false
    }
  ]
}