midonet-cli(1) -- MidoNet command line interface
================================================

## SYNOPSIS

`midonet-cli` `--eval` <command>
`midonet-cli`<br>
midonet> list bridge<br>
midonet> create bridge name demo<br>
midonet> bridge bridge0 add port<br>
midonet> delete bridge bridge0 port port0<br>
midonet> exit

## DESCRIPTION

**midonet-cli** is a command line interface to browse and manipulate MidoNet's
virtual topology. The default mode of operation is an interactive command
prompt, but it can be used to run a command non-interactively, i.e. from a shell
script.

`midonet-cli` is a client to MidoNet's REST API server, therefore it requires
credentials to authenticate before the REST API. These credentials and other
settings such as the REST API's URL can be set via a config file, environment
variables or command line options, in increasing order of precedence.

MidoNet's virtual topology is organized in a tree-like hierarchy that can be
browsed and modified. Details about each type of object are documented in their
respective manpages (listed in [SEE ALSO][] below), the objects accessible at
the root of the tree are listed in [TOP LEVEL OBJECTS][]. Likewise, [COMMANDS][]
briefly lists all the available commands that work on those objects.

## TOP LEVEL OBJECTS

At the root of MidoNet's virtual topology, live the following object
collections:

  * `router` (see midonet-cli-router(1))
  * `bridge` (see midonet-cli-bridge(1))
  * `chain` (see midonet-cli-chain(1))
  * `host` (see midonet-cli-host(1))
  * `port-group` (see midonet-cli-port-group(1))
  * `tunnel-zone` (see midonet-cli-tunnel-zone(1))
  * `host-versions` (see midonet-cli-host-version(1))
  * `system-state` (see midonet-cli-system-state(1))
  * `write-version` (see midonet-cli-write-version(1))

## COMMANDS

  * `describe` [<OBJECT>] [<TYPE>]:
  Shows the names of members of an object or object type.

  * `list` [<OBJECT>] <TYPE>:
  Lists all the objects in a collection.

  * `show` <OBJECT> [<FIELD>]:
  Prints the contents of an object or of one of its members.

  * `create`|`add` [<OBJECT>] <TYPE> {<FIELD> <VALUE>}:
  Creates a new object under a parent object, or at the root, and assigns values
  to some of its members.

  * `install` <TYPE> <FILE>:
  Creates a new object of the specified object type from a given file.

  * `set` <OBJECT> {<FIELD> <VALUE>}:
  Updates values for members of an existing object.

  * `delete` <OBJECT>:
  Deletes an existing object.

  * `sett` <TENANT>:
  Sets the currently active tenant ID.

  * `cleart`:
  Clears the currently active tenant ID.

  * `debug` `on`|`off`:
  Toggles debug mode.

## OBJECT ALIASES

`midonet-cli` tries hard to let the user work without having to memorize
or copy & paste object UUIDs.

In interactive mode, `midonet-cli` will automatically generate object aliases
for every object that it learns about. The CLI will learn about objects when
the user lists them, shows them or creates them.

For example, listing the routers in a virtual topology will create an alias for
each of them, they can be used later interchangeably anywhere a UUID would be
needed:

  * Listing the routers in the system:
    midonet> router list<br>
    router router0 name demo<br>
    router router1 name MidonetProviderRouter

  * Showing the UUID of one of the routers:
    midonet> router router1 show id<br>
    74b32ca0-cc7f-4d17-8547-efa5f1fada54

  * Listing the ports in a router:
    midonet> router router1 list port<br>
    port port0 device router1 mac 02:d6:2b:08:85:6f address 192.0.2.1 \ <br>
    net 192.0.2.0/24 <br>
    port port1 device router1 mac 02:78:16:e6:00:8a address 203.0.113.1 \ <br>
    net 203.0.113.0/24 peer bridge0:port0

  * The same command, using the UUID instead of the router alias:
    midonet> router 74b32ca0-cc7f-4d17-8547-efa5f1fada54 list port<br>
    port port0 device router1 mac 02:d6:2b:08:85:6f address 192.0.2.1 \ <br>
    net 192.0.2.0/24<br>
    port port1 device router1 mac 02:78:16:e6:00:8a address 203.0.113.1 \ <br>
    net 203.0.113.0/24 peer bridge0:port0

Aliases for children are scoped to their parent object. In this case, a port's
alias is scoped within its parent router, thus there could be a <router0:port0>
and a <router1:port0> in the same system.

Because aliases are created on demand as the CLI discovers the objects, each
CLI session starts with an empty alias database. This has two implications:

  * The same object may receive different aliases in different sessions, if the
    CLI discovers it in different order.
  * There are no aliases in clean session, the command to list a router's ports
    by alias above would not have worked if the routers hadn't been listed
    before. This doesn't happen with UUIDs.

## CONFIGURATION FILE

`midonet-cli` will load configuration options from `~/.midonetrc`, if found.
The file should be in ini format, `midonet-cli` options will be looked up in
the `[cli]` section:

  * `api_url`:
    MidoNet API server URL.

  * `username`:
    Username for connection to the REST API.

  * `password`:
    Password.

  * `project_id`:
    The MidoNet project ID.

  * `tenant`:
    The virtual topology tenant to start the session with, it may later be
    changed at will in the middle of an interactive session.  To not load
    any tenant, set it to an empty string.

## OPTIONS

The options below modify `midonet-cli`'s behaviour, overriding those found in
the configuration file or environment variables.

Authentication options:

  * `--midonet-url` <URL>:
    MidoNet API server URL.

  * `-u` <USERNAME>, `--user` <USERNAME>:
    The username to use when connecting to the REST API.

  * `-p`, `--password`:
    Prompt for the user's password interactively.

  * `-i` <PROJECT_ID>, `--project-id` <PROJECT_ID>:
    The MidoNet project ID.

  * `--tenant` <TENANT>:
    The virtual topology tenant to start the session with, it may later be
    changed at will in the middle of an interactive session.

  * `-A`, `--no-auth`:
    Don't require authentication parameters, useful if the REST API is set up
    in mock-auth mode.

Miscellaneous options:

  * `-e` <COMMAND>, `--eval` <COMMAND>:
    Execute <COMMAND> in non-interactive mode and exit.

  * `-d`, `--debug`:
    Enable debug mode.

  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Print a brief help message.

## ENVIRONMENT

  * `MIDO_API_URL`:
    The URL for the MidoNet's REST API (see [FILES][] above).

  * `MIDO_USER`:
    REST API user name (see [FILES][] above).

  * `MIDO_PROJECT_ID`:
    The OpenStack project ID (see [FILES][] above).

  * `MIDO_TENANT`:
    Tenant name (see [FILES][] above).

## EXAMPLES

This is an example configuration file:

  `[cli]`<br>
  `api_url`=<http://localhost:8181/midonet-api><br>
  `username`=admin<br>
  `password`=admin_pass<br>
  `project_id`=midonet_provider<br>
  `tenant`=demo

## COPYRIGHT

midonet-cli is Copyright (C) 2013 Midokura PTE LTD.

## SEE ALSO

midonet-cli-router(1), midonet-cli-bridge(1), midonet-cli-chain(1),
midonet-cli-host(1), midonet-cli-port-group(1), midonet-cli-tunnel-zone(1)
