mn-conf(1) -- MidoNet configuration tool
========================================

## SYNOPSIS

    $ mn-conf dump  [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME -s] [-H]
    $ mn-conf get   [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME -s] [-H] CONFIG_KEY
    $ mn-conf set   [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME] [-c] CONFIG_STRING
    $ mn-conf set   [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME] [-c] < STDIN
    $ mn-conf unset [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME] CONFIG_KEY
    $ mn-conf template-get [-a | -h HOST_ID]
    $ mn-conf template-set -h HOST_ID -t TEMPLATE_NAME
    $ mn-conf template-clear -h HOST_ID
    $ mn-conf template-list
    $ mn-conf hosts
    $ mn-conf doc CONFIG_KEY
    $ mn-conf import [-h HOST_ID | -t TEMPLATE_NAME] [--all] -f CONFIG_FILE

## DESCRIPTION

MidoNet stores the configuration for all of its nodes in a central repository.
**mn-conf** is a command line tool for the inspection and manipulation of this
configuration.

The configuration for a particular MidoNet node is composed of several different
sources that can be managed using `mn-conf`. By order of priority, it's composed
of the following pieces of configuration:

  * *The node-specific configuration* assigned to the node based on its UUID.
  Options found here apply to no other MidoNet nodes. This is useful while
  troubleshooting the behaviour of an individual node or when there is reason
  for a node to have a different value on a specific configuration key.
  * *The configuration template assigned to this node*. Configuration templates
  allow applying sets of configuration values to groups of MidoNet nodes. For
  instance, one might like to assign all MidoNet agents running on the gateway
  hosts of a cloud the same configuration template, so they can be sized
  differently than agents running on hosts dedicated to compute services.
  * *The "default" configuration template*. This template is applied, with less
  priority, to all nodes regardless of whether they are assigned to a different
  template. This is the best place to store cloud-wide configuration settings.
  MidoNet does not touch this template, even across upgrades, settings written
  here by operators remain in place until they are removed or unless they are
  overridden by a higher-priority configuration source.
  * *The configuration schema*. The schema is managed by MidoNet and changes
  across upgrades. Thus, operators may not edit the schema. It contains the
  default values for all existing configuration options. Also, many configuration
  keys are annotated with documentation. This documentation can be found by
  appending the *_description* suffix to a configuration option.

Note that, at runtime, MidoNet nodes will read legacy configuration files too,
and they will take precedence over central repository configuration. Thus
MidoNet agent will give priority to any values it finds in
`/etc/midolman/midolman.conf` over the configuration sources described above.
This cannot be managed with `mn-conf`, because it doesn't know if its running on
the same host.

`mn-conf` is capable of importing the non-default values in a legacy
configuation file into one of the central repository config sources described
above. While the `mn-conf` configuration system is fully backwards compatible
with legacy configuration files, the `import` command is a seamless mechanism to
transition to the new configuration system. See below, under `import`, for a
description of this feature.


## CONFIGURATION FORMAT

MidoNet uses the [HOCON](https://github.com/typesafehub/config/blob/master/HOCON.md)
configuration file format. While it's a super set of JSON, it's is much more
compact and forgiving and, among other things, allows comments.

Please refer to the HOCON documentation for a complete reference. But, rest
assured that using plain JSON will just work.

Here are a two examples of equivalent pieces of configuration that will be
understood by MidoNet:

JSON:

    foo {
        bar {
            baz : 42
            aString : "value"
            aDuration : "100ms"
        }
    }

Flat:

     foo.bar.baz : 42
     foo.bar.aString : "value"
     foo.bar.aDuration : 100ms


Although both examples will yield the same results, the second example shows
what configuration keys look like when queried. Either in code or in `mn-conf`
commands keys should be referred to using the dotted notation.


## SUBCOMMANDS

`dump [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME> `| -s] [-H]`

Dumps the entire selected configuration.

  * `--host` <HOST_ID>, `-h` <HOST_ID>:
    Selects a host id for which to dump configuration. The special value `local`
    will resolve to the local host id.
  * `--template` <TEMPLATE>, `-t` <TEMPLATE>:
    Asks for a dump of a particular configuration template.
  * `--schema`, `-s`:
    Asks for a dump of the configuration schema.
  * `--host-only`, `-H`:
    If `-h` was given, print only the node-specific configuration for the given
    host. Otherwise `mn-conf` will print the configuration the host would have
    at runtime, combining the node-specific config with its template, the
    defaults and the schema.

`get [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME> `| -s] [-H]` <CONFIG_KEY>

Print the value assigned to a particular configuration key. See the above, in
`dump`, the options for selecting the configuration source(s) to read from.


`set [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME>`] [-c]` **&lt;** <STDIN>
`set [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME>`] [-c]` <CONFIG_STRING>

Reads configuration string in its trailing argument, or from STDIN if no
argumenti given. It will then store it in the selected configuration source.
The input will be merged on top of the existing configuration, unless `--clear`
is given, in that case the input will replace the existing configuration. See
above, in `dump`, the options for selecting the configuration source to write to.

  * `-c`, `--clear`:
  Clear the configuration before storing the values read from standard input.


 `unset [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME>`]` <CONFIG_KEY>

Clears the value of a configuration key in a selected configuration source. See
above, in `dump`, the options for selecting the configuration source to write to.

`template-get [-a | -h` <HOST_ID>`]`

Queries the assignments of configuration templates to MidoNet node IDs.

  * `-a`, `--all`:
    Prints all template assignments.
  * `-h` <HOST_ID>, `--host` <HOST_ID>:
    Prints the template assignment for the given host id. The special value
    `local` will resolve to the local host id.

`template-set -h` <HOST_ID> `-t` <TEMPLATE_NAME>

Assigns a configuration template to a host id.

`template-clear -h` <HOST_ID>

Clears the template assignment for a host id

`template-list`

Lists existing templates and the hosts that use them.

`hosts`

Displays information about hosts that have custom configurations or non-default
templates assigned to them.

`import [-h` <HOST_ID> `| -t` <TEMPLATE_NAME>`] [-a] -f` <CONFIG_FILE>

Imports values from a legacy configuration file into the centralized
configuration repository. The default behavior is to import values that differ
from the configuration schema only, but the `-a` option will make `mn-conf`
import all values. `import` will automatically handle keys that have changed
name, path or type. See above, in `dump`, the options for selecting the
configuration source where `mn-conf` will write the imported values.

   * `-a`, `--all`:
   Import all values, instead of just those that differ from the configuration schema.
   * `-f` <CONFIG_FILE>, `--file` <CONFIG_FILE>:
   Path to the file were `mn-conf` will find the legacy configuration.

## MISCELLANEOUS OPTIONS

  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Print a brief help message.

## EXAMPLES

Set a configuration key in the default configuration template:

    $ echo "a.config.key : 42" | mn-conf set -t default
    $ mn-conf set -t default "another.config.key : 100s"

Read the documentation for a config key

    $ mn-conf doc another.config.key

See the configuration schema, with all the configuration keys and their default
values:

    $ mn-conf dump -s

Dump the runtime configuration (minus local configuration files) of a MidoNet agent:

    $ mn-conf dump -h a5ff1460-d00c-11e4-8830-0800200c9a66

Create a configuration template and assign it to a particular agent:

    $ echo "a.config.key : 42" | mn-conf set -t "new_template"
    $ mn-conf template-set -h a5ff1460-d00c-11e4-8830-0800200c9a66 -t new_template

Importing non-default values from a legacy configuration file:

    $ mn-conf import -t default -f /etc/midolman/midolman.conf

    Importing legacy configuration:
    agent {
        midolman {
            "bgp_holdtime"="120s"
        }
    }
    zookeeper {
        "session_gracetime"="30000ms"
    }
    
Notice how `mn-conf` will automatically handle keys that have been moved or renamed.

## FILES

While all configuration is stored in ZooKeeper and both `mn-conf` and MidoNet
processes that will make use of it, they all need to bootstrap their connection
to ZooKeeper before they can access configuration.

Both `mn-conf` and MidoNet nodes will read bootstrap configuration from these
sources, in order of preference:

  * Environment variables. See **ENVIRONMENT**, below.
  * `~/.midonetrc`
  * `/etc/midonet/midonet.conf`
  * `/etc/midolman/midolman.conf`

These files are expected to be in .ini format, and contain the following keys:

    [zookeeper]
    zookeeper_hosts = 127.0.0.1:2181
    root_key = /midonet/v1


## ENVIRONMENT

  * `MIDO_ZOOKEEPER_HOSTS`:
  The ZooKeeper connect string.

  * `MIDO_ZOOKEEPER_ROOT_KEY`:
  Root path in the ZooKeeper server where configuation is stored.

## COPYRIGHT

mn-conf is Copyright (C) 2015 Midokura SARL.

## SEE ALSO

midonet-cli(1), mm-trace(1)
