# L2 Gateway

## Motivation

Connect MidoNet virtual bridges and routers to physical L2 segments
where VLAN tags are widely used to provide L2 isolation in the cloud.
In addition to this, this should at least provide a failover capability
with 2 virtual ports which could be bound with ports on different hosts.

## Bridge behaviour

The Bridge interior port has an *optional* property `vlan_id` used to
connect a Vlan-Aware bridge to a Vlan-Unaware bridge. Bridge exterior
ports are used as Trunks. Also, the API now allows connecting interior
bridge ports, as long as one of the two has a "vlan-id" tag in it.

The Bridge will keep all it's previous behaviour and perform MAC
learning. The pressence of vlan-ids in frames will imply the following
changes:
- ToPortSet actions will include the interior port tagged with the
  frame's vlan-id (if exists). The frame going into the interior port
  will also get the vlan-id POP'd.
- For Frames with a vlan-tag, the Bridge will require that the port
  matched in the MAC table matches the port that is tagged with the
  frame's vlan-id. Otherwise, it'll drop the frame.

Again, the multicast on a Vlan-Aware Bridge case requires the usage of
the ForkAction (the simulation results in a ToPortSet, plus a ToPort
towards the VUB). This is similar to the case described above (a
multicast at the VUB), however, in that case the PacketContext's match
is modified removing the vlan-id as a result of the second simulation in
the VAB. But here, the PacketContext modification happens on the first
simulation (the VAB is responsible to POP the vlan) so the Coordinator
would apply the FlowActionPopVLAN *before* the frame get's sent from the
PortSet (to the trunks). Which is incorrect. This must happen only
*after* the ToPortSetAction is processed.

## Coordinator changes

Supporting multicast from VUB's connected to a VAB required an
additional change in the Coordinator. Note that in a typical topology, a
VUB linked to a bunch of VMs will be connected to a single VAB. A
multicast frame (e.g.: an ARP request from a VM) will need to send the
frame to its PortSet, but also to the VAB in order to create L2
connectivity towards the trunks. This is achieved by generating a new
type of action ForkAction, that contains a list of actions to be
executed sequentially: ToPortSet (locally on the VUB) and a ToPort
(towards the VAB).

Note also that after the second simulation is executed on the VAB, it
will result in a second ToPortSet on the VAB (sending to all the
trunks), that will include a PUSH VLAN action. This has implications on
the Flow that should result from the simulation since we'll need to
ensure that the output actions to the ports connected to the VUB is made
before the PUSH VLAN action. The output actions to the VAB trunks should
happen after the PUSH is executed.

This behaviour on the flood of a VLAN tagged frame on a VAB required
further changes in the ForkAction, implemented with a new type of
action: DoFlowAction. When the VAB simulates the multicast, it'll return
a ForkAction containing -in this order- a ToPortSetAction, a
DoFlowAction(FlowActionPopVLAN), and a ToPortAction.  When the
Coordinator processes the DoFlowAction it'll add an
AddVirtualWildcardFlow to the list of results from each part of the fork
in the right orden, and also modify the WildcardMatch in the
PacketContext so that the second simulation (on the VUB) doesn't see the
VLAN id in the match. When the results are merged, the output on the
VAB's trunk retains the VLAN id, but the outputs generated by the VUB
won't.
