mm-ctl(1) -- Midolman command line interface
============================================

## SYNOPSIS

`mm-ctl` [--config <file>] [--command] [<args>]

## DESCRIPTION

**mm-ctl** is a command line interface to manage Midolman.  It is not a client
of the REST API, and it does not provide interfaces to manage datapath.
It is, however, a client of the MidoNet data cluster, and furthermore, it
is meant to provide all CLI functions with the abstraction level that sits somewhere
in between the REST API and datapath.  It is useful for certain operations
needed by cloud orchestration systems to run directly from the hypervisor
host.

## OPTIONS

  * `--config` <file>:
    Midolman configuraiton file path.  If not supplied,
    **/etc/midolman/midolman.conf** is used.

## COMMANDS
  These are option commands in which one of them must be supplied.

  * `--bind-port` [<PORT_ID>] [<DEVICE_NAME>]:
  Bind a virtual port to a local device.

  * `--unbind-port` [<PORT_ID>]:
  Unbind a virtual port from its mapped device.

  * `--list-hosts` [<PORT_ID>]:
  List Network Agent hosts in the system.

## EXAMPLES

To bind a virtual port with ID 2a244ece-6e95-4255-a598-8cefba3777a9
to a local interface called tap0:

  $ mm-ctl --bind-port 2a244ece-6e95-4255-a598-8cefba3777a9 tap0

To unbind a virtual port with ID 2a244ece-6e95-4255-a598-8cefba3777a9:

  $ mm-ctl --unbind-port 2a244ece-6e95-4255-a598-8cefba3777a9

To list hosts in the system

  $ mm-ctl --list-hosts

  Output includes hosts' id, name, isAlive, non link local addresses,
  and vport bindings, which looks like the following:

  Host: id=7d8fd115-2210-45b0-b915-414a1f54e97f (*)
  name=optimator.tyo.midokura.net
  isAlive=true
  addresses:
    /127.0.0.1
    /0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1
    /192.168.100.34
    /192.168.122.1
  vport-host-if-bindings:
    VirtualPortMapping{virtualPortId=b67d5a18-9643-43fc-be4a-6892ecbf82d9, localDeviceName='osvm-d704-b67d'}
    VirtualPortMapping{virtualPortId=207bf4f4-44f2-4614-89d4-c97b27e5d326, localDeviceName='osvm-b35a-207b'}
    VirtualPortMapping{virtualPortId=16e45ac8-a2e5-4dc1-9c96-441e7db6db9c, localDeviceName='osvm-0f3c-16e4'}
    VirtualPortMapping{virtualPortId=18669c7c-c9e4-46f8-a2b0-87829d2ee54a, localDeviceName='osvm-35f2-1866'}
    VirtualPortMapping{virtualPortId=17d67171-5a3d-41e7-98d6-ff7925635f98, localDeviceName='osvm-e7f7-17d6'}
    ...


## COPYRIGHT

mm-ctl is Copyright (C) 2013 Midokura PTE LTD.
